Create ExportFormats.md (#72)
pharo-open-documentation/pharo-wiki: General/ExportFormats.md

# Export formats

> Pharo store its code in memory by default or in a snapshot of the memory when we save a Pharo image. This make it complicated to manage code in the long terme or to collaborate with others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pharo stores its code in memory by default or in a snapshot of the memory when we save a Pharo image. This makes it complicated to manage code in the long term or to collaborate with others.
```

In order to be able to save some code in readable files, Pharo includes some textual export formats. This page will explain the main export formats used to save code in VCS such as git.

> This page will present formats from the most recommanded for new projects to the less recommanded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will present formats from the most recommended for new projects to the less recommended.
```

| Works well on windows | :white_check_mark: | :x: | :x: |
| Easy to merge two branches | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :x: |
| Takes a reasonable space on file system | :white_check_mark: | :x: | :x: |
| Works with Iceberg | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :x: |
| Works with Monticello | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: |

### Supported Pharo versions

| Pharo Version | FileTree metadata full | FileTree metadata less | Tonel |
| ------------- | ------------- |------------- |------------- |
3 |  :white_check_mark: | Update Metacello? | :x: |
4 |  :white_check_mark: |  :white_check_mark: | Update Metacello + Install Tonel |
5 |  :white_check_mark: |  :white_check_mark: | Update Metacello + Install Tonel |
6.0 |  :white_check_mark: |  :white_check_mark: | Update Metacello + Install Tonel |
6.1 | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: |
7 | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: |
8 | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: |

## Tonel 

Tonel ([https://github.com/pharo-vcs/tonel](https://github.com/pharo-vcs/tonel)) is an export format introduced in Pharo 6.1. 

> It creates one file by class or extented class and works well on windows (compared to file tree).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It creates one file by class or extended class and works well on windows (compared to file tree).
```

### Tonel Pros and Cons

Pros
- Works well on windows 
- Not much space lost because of small files
- Export readable files
- No problem during merge because of metadata

Cons

> - Work out of the box only since Pharo 6.1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Works out of the box since Pharo 6.1, not officially supported by older versions.
```

Author: I do not agree. Tonel is officially supported (The checks are done for Pharo 5 to 7 and we try to keep p4 compatibility too). It's just that it is not out of the box and requires to be installed.

Author: If you agree, can you edit your suggestion to only keep the first part of the sentence please?

- Since the format is more recent than the others, some edges cases might cause trouble. (It rarely happens)

### Tonel supported Pharo versions

Tonel works out of the box in Pharo 6.1 and higher. But it is possible to make it work in Pharo 4 to 6.0 by updating Metacello and installing Tonel.

```Smalltalk
Metacello new
  baseline: 'Metacello';
  repository: 'github://Metacello/metacello:master/repository';
  get.
Metacello new
  baseline: 'Metacello';
  repository: 'github://Metacello/metacello:master/repository';
  onConflict: [:ex | ex allow];
  load.
Metacello new 
	repository: 'github://pharo-vcs/tonel';
	baseline: 'Tonel';
	load.
```

## FileTree metadata less 

> FileTree ([https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree](https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree)) is the first export format planned to use Pharo with Git that was integrated. It had a first version with a lot of metadata (see section Filetree metadata full) then a new version with a metadata less format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FileTree ([https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree](https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree)) is the first export format planned to use Pharo with Git that was integrated. It had the first version with a lot of metadata (see section Filetree metadata full) then a new version with metadata less format. 
```

This format exports one file per methods. This can cause trouble with Windows because Windows has a maximum path and file name length of 255 characters. This limit can easily be reached with FileTree. 

> Another problem of the FileTree format is that most Pharo's method are short and creating one file by method waste a lot of space because the physical representation of files on a drive have a minimal size (4Ko on NTFS file systems) that is reached by most of Pharo's method. 

Reviewer: 4Ko??? 4 KiB (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilobyte)

Reviewer 2: It comes from the french word for byte "octet" so Ko (French) = KB (English). We use lowercase "o" because it does not clash with Kb (kilobit). :-)

> Another problem of the FileTree format is that most Pharo's method are short and creating one file by method waste a lot of space because the physical representation of files on a drive have a minimal size (4Ko on NTFS file systems) that is reached by most of Pharo's method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another problem of the FileTree format is that most Pharo's methods are short and creating one file by method waste a lot of space because the physical representation of files on a drive has a minimal size (4 KiB on NTFS file systems) that is reached by most of Pharo's method. 
```

Its advantage compared to FileTree metadata full is that there is no problem during merge because of metadata.

## FileTree metadata less Pros and Cons 

Pros
- Easy to browse the history of a method
- Present since Pharo 4 out of the box
- No problem during merge because of metadata

Cons
- Cause trouble on Windows
- Waste space on the file system

### FileTree metadata less supported Pharo versions

FileTree metadata less is supported out of the box since Pharo 4.0. 

It might be possible to use it in older Pharo version by updating Metacello.

## FileTree metadata full

> FileTree metadata full ([https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree](https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree))is the ancestor of FileTree metadata less and works in the same way but also export a lot of metadata relatif to the commits such has a commit message (different from the one of the VCS), timestamp of the method compilation, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FileTree metadata full ([https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree](https://github.com/dalehenrich/filetree) )is the ancestor of FileTree metadata less and works in the same way but also export a lot of metadata relating to the commits such has a commit message (different from the one of the VCS), the timestamp of the method compilation, etc.
```

> This simplify the tooling because the tools can get some informations from the metadata instead of the VCS but it also creates a lot of trouble while merging two branches using this format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This simplifies the tooling because the tools can get some information from the metadata instead of the VCS but it also creates a lot of trouble while merging two branches using this format.
```
